ARC-64: AVM Run Time Errors based on program bytecode (#315)
algorandfoundation/ARCs: ARCs/arc-0065.md

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ARC
created: 2024-10-09
---

## Abstract

This document introduces conventions for rising informative run time error messages
on the Algorand Virtual Machine (AVM) directly from the program bytecode.

## Motivation

The AVM does not offer native opcodes to catch and raise run time errors.

The lack of native error handling semantics could lead to fragmentation of tooling
and frictions for AVM clients, who are unable to retrieve informative and useful
hints about the occurred run time failures.

This ARC formalizes a convention to rise AVM run time errors based just on the program
bytecode.

## Specification

The keywords "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**", "**SHALL NOT**",
"**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**", and "**OPTIONAL**" 
in this document are to be interpreted as described in <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119">RFC 2119</a>.

> Notes like this are non-normative.

### In Program Errors

When a program wants to emit a run time error code, contained in the bytecode, 
it **MUST**:

1. Push to the stack the bytes string containing the error code;

> 1. Push to the stack the `log` opcode;
> 1. Push to the stack the `err` opcode.

Reviewer: nit: these are opcodes that interact with the stack rather than being put on the stack.
```suggestion
1. Execute the `log` opcode to use the bytes from the top of the stack;
1. Execute the `err` opcode to immediately terminal the program.
```

It is **RECOMMENDED** to use fixed length error codes and _short_ error messages.

### Error examples

Error with a _numeric code_: `ERR:042`.

Error with an _alphanumeric code_: `ERR:BadRequest`.

Error with a _numeric code_ and _short message_: `ERR:042 - A Funny Error`.

### Program example

The program example raises the error `ERR:001 - Invalid Method` for any application 
call to methods different from `m1()void`.

```teal
#pragma version 10

txn ApplicationID
bz end

method "m1()void"
txn ApplicationArgs 0
match method1
byte "ERR:001 - Invalid Method"
log
err

method1:
b end

end:
int 1
```

Full Algod API response of a failed execution:

```json
{
    "data": {
        "app-index":1004,
        "eval-states": [
            { 
                "logs": ["RVJSOiBJbnZhbGlkIE1ldGhvZA=="]
            }
        ],
        "group-index":0,
        "pc":41
    },
    "message":"TransactionPool.Remember: transaction ESI4GHAZY46MCUCLPBSB5HBRZPGO6V7DDUM5XKMNVPIRJK6DDAGQ: logic eval error: err opcode executed. Details: app=1004, pc=41, opcodes=pushbytes 0x4552523a20496e76616c6964204d6574686f64 // \"ERR:001 - Invalid Method\"; log; err; label2:"
}
```

> The `message` field contains the error `ERR:001 - Invalid Method`.

Reviewer: As discussed, I think changing it to rely on the `logs` array would be better. Just decode each value and compare against the regex.
Here's an example I did via the command line with an application that attempts to use ABI methods first, then falls back to non-ABI methods. It resulted in two logged errors before failing.
```
curl -s -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4001/v2/transactions --data-binary @appl_call.stxn | jq -r '."data"."eval-states"[0]."logs"[] | @base64d' | grep -E "ERR:(\w*)(?:\s?-\s?(.*))?"
ERR:01 - Invalid Method
ERR:02 - No arguments supplied
```

Reviewer 2: IIRC the SDKs (e.g. JS) currently only throw the error message, e.g. when you do `sendRawTransaction` in JS/TS.

To me, including the error code in the surfaced message makes it significantly more useful

```json
{
    "data": {
        "app-index":1004,
        "eval-states": [
            { 
                "logs": ["RVJSOjAwMTpJbnZhbGlkIE1ldGhvZA=="]
            }
        ],
        "group-index":0,
        "pc":41
    },
    "message":"TransactionPool.Remember: transaction ESI4GHAZY46MCUCLPBSB5HBRZPGO6V7DDUM5XKMNVPIRJK6DDAGQ: logic eval error: err opcode executed. Details: app=1004, pc=41, opcodes=pushbytes 0x4552523a3030313a496e76616c6964204d6574686f64 // \"ERR:001:Invalid Method\"; log; err; label2:"
}
```

The `logs` array contains the `base64` encoded error `ERR:001:Invalid Method`.

The `logs` array **MAY** contain elements that are not errors (as specified by the
regexp).

It is **NOT RECOMMENDED** to use on the `message` field to retrieve errors.

### AVM Compilers

AVM compilers (and related tools) **SHOULD** provide two error compiling options:

1. The one specified in this ARC as **default**;
1. The one specified in [ARC-64](./arc-0064.md) as fallback, if compiled bytecode
size exceeds the AVM limits.

> Compilers **MAY** optimize for program bytecode size by storing the error prefixes
in the `bytecblock` and concatenating the error message at the cost of some extra

> opcodes.

Reviewer 2: Relying on `.logs` is great when you have them, but I believe a lot of SDKs would hide `.logs` when e.g. throwing from a sendRawTransaction. The error message is mostly guaranteed to be propagated through the SDK, backend->frontend in case of a backend executor, etc. Hiding the error code from the algod error message would significantly detract value imo.

### In Program Errors

When a program wants to emit informative run time errors, contained in the bytecode,
it **MUST**:

1. Push to the stack the bytes string containing the error;
1. Execute the `log` opcode to use the bytes from the top of the stack;
1. Execute the `err` opcode to immediately terminate the program.

Upon a program run time failure, the Algod API returns both the failed *program 
counter* (`pc`) and the `log` content.

### Error format

> The AVM programs bytecode have limited sized. In this convention, the errors are
> part of the bytecode, therefore it is good to mind errors' formatting and sizing.

> Errors consist of a _code_ and an optional _short message_.

> Errors **MUST** statisfy the regexp: `s/^ERR:(\w*)\s-\s(.*)$/`.

Reviewer: I realise this regex wouldn't satisfy the below example of `ERR:042` where there isn't a short message.

Maybe the following would be better? Welcome others input here.
`s/^ERR:(\w*)(\s?-\s?(.*))?$/`

Reviewer: Just realised my example above created a third capturing group. This may be better: `ERR:(\w*)(?:\s?-\s?(.*))?` Which then gives you 2 capturing groups, the first for the error code, the second for the error message.

Author: Good point! Also: both numeric (`ERR:0042`) and alphanumeric error codes should be supported (either "labels" or things like "hex" codes, like `ERR:BAD-REQUEST` or `ERR:0xAA`). I'll update the spec!
